---
layout: post
title: 'random rambles about getting to information utility'
date: '2022-09-01 00:00Z'
categories: post
---

1. Scaling is hard, not well defined, and happens "slowly, then all at once". This is true for people, processes, tools, and products. And most systems aren't layered well for scaling (perhaps because breaking layers is seen as a shortcut or advantage in startup culture). Networking leaned on the OSI model for networking for a very long time even as reality departed further and further away because the layers matched organizational and technological concepts, until they didn't. Analogous story for MVC and client-server architectures. None of our models really fit a world of mobile Internet, distributed applications, or remote work particularly well, and it's beginning to show. Fixing this model-orientation problem is really foundational.

2. "Making things" evolves, as does "Management of making things", from Craft > Mechanization > Industrialization, and I think that building physical stuff, and the management of builders of physical stuff, is much, much more evolved than the building of informational stuff, and that the management of builders of informational stuff is even further behind. This is where the Technologist's Dilemma lives. It is where "Builders want to build" lives. It is where "Move fast and break things" lives. Figuring out how to manage not just Peter Drucker's Information Worker or Richard Florida's Creative Class but the 21st Century equivalent of a Venetian glass blower is really foundational to taking programming from a craft to mechanizing (automating) it to industrializing (systematizing that automation). It doesn't feel like the business management community recognizes this is a problem, much less that they are doing anything about it. This is of particular concern because society (well, the society of the developed world) is already well on the way to what comes after Industrialization and can't succeed without gettting informational stuff commoditized and turned into utilities.

3. To get to Information Utility we have to get deeper into a cycle of solving for configuration > solving for trust > solving for hops so we're a lot closer to zeroconf > zerotrust > zerohop than we are now. Which might be unachievable without sorting the first two problems. Because if we don't, the systems we build are just going to get more and more fragile as they are simultaneously relied on more and more as infrastructure. Because we need information to be like electricity and both of them are trending in the wrong direction. And that is bad.
